Transient aphasias after left hemisphere resective surgery
stephen m. wilson, phd,1,2 daniel lam, ba,3 miranda c. babiak, ms,3 david w. perry, phd,3 tina shih, md,4,5 christopher p. hess, md, phd,4,6 mitchel s. berger, md,3 and
edward F. chang, md3,5
obJect Transient aphasias are often observed in the first few days after a patient has undergone resection in the lan- guage-dominant hemisphere. The aims of this prospective study were to characterize the incidence and nature of these  aphasias and to determine whether there are relationships between location of the surgical site and deficits in specific  language domains.
methods One hundred ten patients undergoing resection to the language-dominant hemisphere participated in the  study. Language was evaluated prior to surgery and 2–3 days and 1 month postsurgery using the Western Aphasia Bat- tery and the Boston Naming Test. Voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping was used to identify relationships between the  surgical site location assessed on MRI and deficits in fluency, information content, comprehension, repetition, and nam- ing.
results Seventy-one percent of patients were classified as aphasic based on the Western Aphasia Battery 2–3 days  postsurgery, with deficits observed in each of the language domains examined. Fluency deficits were associated with  resection of the precentral gyrus and adjacent inferior frontal cortex. Reduced information content of spoken output was  associated with resection of the ventral precentral gyrus and posterior inferior frontal gyrus (pars opercularis). Repetition  deficits were associated with resection of the posterior superior temporal gyrus. Naming deficits were associated with  resection of the ventral temporal cortex, with midtemporal and posterior temporal damage more predictive of naming  deficits than anterior temporal damage. By 1 month postsurgery, nearly all language deficits were resolved, and no lan- guage measure except for naming differed significantly from its presurgical level.
coNclusioNs These findings show that transient aphasias are very common after left hemisphere resective surgery  and that the precise nature of the aphasia depends on the specific location of the surgical site. The patient cohort in this  study provides a unique window into the neural basis of language because resections are discrete, their locations are  not limited by vascular distribution or patterns of neurodegeneration, and language can be studied prior to substantial  reorganization.
